English (AU) (Spoken) [Manually Transcribed Captions]
github.com/WizardTim/WizardTim-captions
So today we're going to be taking a quick
look at this here PIR sensor manufactured
by HPM, specifically a XL632 model.
This PIR sensor failed several years ago so
unfortunately I no longer have the plastic
case it goes in although I was able to find
this here picture on the internet although
rather pixelated it shows what it used to
look like.
In addition I also found the original manual
that it came with and it's filled with all
sorts of fantastic stuff such as this here
usage artwork, as well as some quite useful
information about how to use PIR sensors as
well as how to place them and what their sort
of limitations are and what sort of
loads you can and can't connect to it.
So here's all of the internal circuitry from
it that I kept and we'll have a look at how
it failed and how it failed in a not so nice
way that it came a little too close to maybe
causing a fire.
So first of all we can see that the PCB is
split into two separate PCBs the top one has
all of the low voltage sensing circuitry including
the actual PIR pyro-element and the other
PCB has all of the power electronics including
the power supply and whatever is switching
the load.
And of course clear as day we can see this
here three pin cable between the two of them
that certainly seen better days and was on
the verge of catching fire as well as this
here power PCB that is heavily discolored.
So taking a look at this here power PCB we
can see that there's all sorts of power devices
that you see in this sort of thing we have
this here TO-220 device which is a BTB08 this
is a triac which is what switches the load
it's a triac instead of a relay because these
PIR sensors quite often turn on and off so
you want it to have a very long lifetime and
a relay which is mechanical doesn't last as
many cycles as a triac.
We also have a bridge rectifier here as well
as a rather large maybe two/three watt resistor
next to it so we can assume that this device
uses a resistive dropper there is an inductor
as well as a capacitor however these are just
across mains as well as in series with the
load presumably to just come in compliance
with EMI and RF emission requirements.
There's also a whole heap of transistors as
well as capacitors and resistors splattered
across the PCB these are mostly just to drive
the triac by the looks of it although I couldn't
really be bothered to fully reverse engineer
this thing that's probably what they do.
So taking a closer look at the discolored
area of the PCB we can see it's around the
dropper resistor and one of the leads has
completely delaminated from the single-sided
PCB just completely lifting the pad and this
solder joint looks more like a cowpat than
a solder joint so I think it's fair enough
to say that this is where the failure happened
and it stopped working because it's certainly
been quite hot around here on this PCB and
we can also see that the other leg of this
dropper resistor has also started to lift
off the PCB as well as this here transistor
as well as all the way up the PCB over to
here between these two pins where another
power resistor is I'm not quite sure what
this power resistor does but it looks to be
a one watt resistor.
By the way these two resistors still measure
their correct value as marked on their colour
codes so we can assume that this high temperature
high dissipation is not a result of long-term
use causing the resistance to drift but is
instead a should I call it a design flaw that's
caused too much dissipation which this resistor
really hasn't been able to dissipate correctly
without damaging the PCB and surrounding components.
Now of course I'm not going to attempt to
repair on this sensor it's really just not
worth it the PCB is quite badly damaged with
all of this heat exposure as well as the fact
this happened several years ago this sensor
has already been replaced however we can still
tear it down and learn something from it.
So let's take a look at the other PCB this
here is the cable that connects between the
two of them it's three conductors inside and
as you can see it's quite heavily burnt presumably
this is just going to be ground, power and
the triac on off this thing doesn't do any
sort of dimming.
And here is of course the actual sensor PCB
there's actually quite a lot on here we've
got three SOIC devices first of all we have
a 27L2C which is a low power CMOS dual operational
amplifier we also have the jelly bean LM393
dual comparator and of course no design is
complete without the ubiquitous 555 general
purpose timer and this PCB of course has a
smattering of passives such as resistance
capacitors as well as some active transistors
some diodes and well that's it there's no
fancy microcontrollers on here however that's
a rather surprising number of components for
a PIR sensor these days, these days you'll
just see everything implemented in a single
custom chip as well as significantly fewer
passives.
I'll also mention that these are custom BISS
chips meant for PIR sensors have also been
reused for these fancy radar sensors that
sort of replace PIR sensors in certain applications
these BISS chips certainly weren't intended
for this sort of application but some rather
fancy magic and wizardry has made this possible
these things are rather impressive how they
managed to get this all done for such a low
cost.
And of course on the other side of this PCB
is not much special this the electrolytic
capacitors for timing and power supply regulation
there's these two potentiometers to set the
time delay as well as the sensitivity there's
one of these cadmium sulphide (CdS) photosensors
for day night sensing but of course there's
also the pyroelectric sensor right here in
this metal can.
And that's actually why I'm making this video
today to take a closer look at these metal
cans there is actually quite a lot of information
on the internet about these plenty of people
will tell you how to use them, like Dave Jones
from the EEVblog has a great view about how
to use them and how they work as well as bigclive
who quickly brushes on how they work inside
however I haven't found any good pictures
or any good materials about exactly what's
inside them and how it's all sort of constructed
inside so I want to take a closer look and
actually open one of these up.
First of all just cut off the metal can from
the PCB we can just rip it off with some side
cutters don't need to be careful about this
PCB and here is the actual sensor it's marked
KDS9 [5E1] and it has this nice little window
which is probably made of silicon to pass
the long wave infrared now unfortunately these
markings didn't really return anything however
after looking quite a while I found this data
sheet from Murata I suspect that this is the
device just based on the wording that they
use when they talk about the manufacturing
technique but we can see either way the sort
of stuff that should be inside there is down
here a ‘pyroelectric element’ which has
two pieces and it's in this sort of configuration
which is exactly what other people say is
inside these on the internet so taking an
old pair of side cutters to the silicon window
we can just break that and get one of the
blades in and start cutting the metal can
and just clear out the shrapnel and soon enough
peel all of that back and here's the actual
internals and we can see that this is actually
a ceramic hybrid module which is exactly what
that data sheet mentioned before about construction
technology so we can see here there is this
thick film resistor here which is the same
as in the datasheet schematic as well as the
pyroelectric element here and of course it
has three pins and it's got a sort of matte
finish on it and it's rather interesting uh
it's sort of like a PTC device in its appearance
I guess because well it is a piezoelectric
device at the end of the day umm it's still
rather interesting because we'll it's quite
thick umm… actually it's *exhale* I don't
really understand this though it's doesn't
really make any sense it's really thick I
guess it must have really low thermal connectivity
because of course there's very little energy
coming in from the infrared umm… actually
looking at this this really doesn't make sense
umm… actually where's the transistor in
this um that was meant to be a trans… have
I been lied to?
Is what, what is going on here?
What's with these two pads here there definitely
was something…
Wait a minute!
This looks suspiciously like a upside down
SOT-23 transistor uh let me get my spudger
in here and brute force it open and sure enough
we can see that there's a lead frame inside.
And if we look a little bit closer we can
also see that yeah that's a silicon die, yeah
this is an upside down transistor that's uh
definitely not a pyroelectric element and
these two solder joints are presumably where
the pyroelectric device once was I presumably
broke it when I rammed that pair of side cutters
right through the window and it like in neanderthal
so uh yeah taking a look at the video and
yeah whatever this white thing is here that's
definitely broken and here again yeah that's
broken and I presumably uh emptied that out
into the bin.
But fear not because through the magic of
buying another one from Digi-Key that's probably
about the same we have a second and third
chance for me to screw it up again.
But before we cut open this one a quick intermission
instead I want to mention this this is the
smartphone that's recording this video and
it's also the one that recorded the last video
about the Simpson washing machine this is
actually my everyday smartphone that I bought
last year and it's been pretty good for making
these videos is it takes 4K well uh Sony advertises
4K but it's actually not DCI 4K it's some
weird sort of not really just barely 4K that
uh some weird 21x9 aspect ratio so I just
crop it to 1080p but regardless of that it
was still a pretty good upgrade from my old
smartphone from 2013 which was this here Nokia
Lumia 1020 which has an absolutely fantastic
camera module I mean just look at the size
of this sensor module it is enormous especially
for a smartphone it's 41 megapixel so it takes
fantastic photos but because it's from 2013
the video quality is 1080p, 30 frames per
second, just barely and uh it drops most of
those frames however this and the new Sony
phone have a number of limitations for example
the aperture is fixed as well as there's certain
software limitations like you can't really
properly adjust the white balance as well
as a number of software bugs that Sony does
not want to fix for some reason, so I decided
to go out and buy a little camera that I could
properly adjust the settings on and this is
it here, well okay it's, it's not a small
camera it's actually a professional full-frame
camera but trust me I've got a good reason
for this and of course this is just the body
of the camera I also went out and bought a
lens for it, well okay I bought seven lenses
for it however they take fantastic pictures
so it was worth it in my book now I've actually
already shown you some of the pictures from
this camera the previous PCB shots are actually
from this here very fancy 300 mm telephoto
lens which takes a fantastic PCB shots as
you can see here on these PIR modules and
here's a very nice PCB shot of an old GeForce
4 card that I took for something else, but
this here 90 mm macro lens is the one that
took all of the pictures of the PIR sensor
that you're about to see this lens is actually
capable of 1:1 macro photos so they're quite
large and very high quality it's far greater
than anything I would have been able to do
on the smartphone however I decided that that
macro lens part way through the video wasn't
really going to cut it for some of the other
pictures you're going to see so one of the
fantastic things about having a full-frame
interchangeable lens camera is that I can
jerry-rig all sorts of adapters together to
make this which is a microscope objective
on a tube extension as well as an E-mount
so this is what took all of the micro photos
at the end of the video that you'll see so
I hope you enjoyed the improved quality of
these photos I certainly enjoyed them quite
a lot.
And another cool thing is that this channel
actually regained its monetization so YouTube's
actually been giving me a cut of the ads you've
been seeing on these videos now and with that
money I actually went out and bought this
SD card and this lens filter so thank you
to those who have been watching the ads although
I don't recommend it because the ads are not
worth your time ,the money has actually been
going somewhere other than YouTube's back
pocket and presumably influencing my P-score,
so enough with all of that talk let's get
this macro lens on now and take a look at
that PIR sensor module.
So this here is the replacement PIR sensor
that I bought off Digi-Key it's made by Murata
which is the same as the previous sensor however
it's a different model just because this is
the one that I was able to buy um and well
it's pretty much exactly the same it's about
the same size it's a same two element thing
so taking a rotary tool grinder to this one
this time that way I don't have to break through
the window I can just grind off the top of
the metal can and we can see that it's glued
in with this black glue and then cutting into
that even more we can take all of that glue
out and we can actually see now that piece
of uh whatever it is ceramic piezoelectric
material as well as a FR4 PCB by looks of
it in this one rather than a ceramic hybrid,
so cutting the rest of that off now and we
can see Oooo, now this, this is the picture
that I got the camera for, check this out
this is actually not a single picture this
is actually many pictures stitched together
in a composite called a focus stack that way
it's really sharp really nice but I can make
this picture even better check this out *pop*
there we go now it's good.
So if I bring back that application note from
before we can have a read of it we can see
that the sensor uses a pyroelectric effect
of a pyroelectric ceramic which is a kind
of piezoelectric ceramic which is what this
thingy here on the top is the way this works
is that when a human walks past the thermal
infrared energy heats up these little cells
here which causes a ‘spontaneous polarization
of the ceramic’ which you can see here in
this figure pretty much that just means that
it creates a voltage differential between
the two electrodes of the sensor pretty much
like you'd see in the piezoelectric effect
of certain ceramic capacitors as well as piezoelectric
speakers and vibration sensors it's pretty
much the same thing however it's based on
temperature so it's pyroelectric.
And as you'd expect in order to be so sensitive
to something as minuscule as the thermal energy
from a human walking past the thermal mass
of this piece of ceramic has to be extremely
low so if we take a look here at this here
telecentric photo side-on we can see that
the ceramic element on the top is extremely
thin it's actually 0.1 mm thick so it has
a decently good response to any sort of thermal
energy but it's still not as good as the micro-balances
in something like a microbolometer that you'll
see in like a thermal camera but that's so
much more expensive something like this is
amazingly cheap and can be put into something
like a consumer product we can also see here
that the element has two black rectangles
and that's because there's actually two separate
pyroelectric elements here and on the next
page of the application note we can see that
it starts to talk about why the optics are
so necessary for this thing and that's because
the lens at the front of this thing actually
focuses onto two separate points which is
these two separate pyroelectric elements and
that allows it to sense movement much more
easily at a much lower cost it doesn't have
to measure absolute temperature it just has
to recognize changes in the thermal energy
when someone walks through the field of view
in specific ways and that's why before in
the HPM product information we saw that they
took the time to explain to the customer how
you should place it and in what ways it will
be triggered it won't be triggered when you
walk away from the sensor but when you walk
across its field of view it will trigger and
if we cut this PCB out of the PIR sensor we
can see on the other side that there's a transistor
and two capacitors and that's exactly what
they said would be there in the product data
sheet and also as you'd expect because this
thing is so thin if you just take a pair of
tweezers and poke at it pretty much breaks
immediately.
I'll also mention that there are actually
different types of pyroelectric infrared sensors
that can detect more different types of movements
like this here quad type pyroelectric sensor
that has four of these elements and that can
detect people moving across the field of view
both sideways as well as up to down so there
are certain applications where you'd want
to use this for instance on a ceiling.
And the whilst we're talking about infrared
thermal sensors I should mention that a pyroelectric
sensor is not a thermopile sensor a thermopile
sensor is what you'd see in say one of those
non-contact infrared sensors and to be honest
this is more comparable to something like
a microbolometer that I mentioned before that
you'd see in a thermal camera however this
is working on a completely different sort
of theory it's similar but I have one of them
so let's take it apart and see what's inside
we can see here that the external construction
is very similar we have a metal can with a
window on top presumably it's probably silicon
the sort of wavelengths are similar but it
probably doesn't have the 5 µm filter maybe
a different type of filter.
So taking a big cut out of the side of this
thing we can see that there's actually a silicon
die inside here not just a ceramic element
there's also another thing off to the right
here and the datasheet says that this is a
thermistor which is used for getting the ambient
temperature of the die and that's used for
compensating it which we'll get into later
and here we have a picture of a second one
I cut open a bit more carefully and this picture
is actually taken on the microscope lens this
is again another composite although this one
I did quite quickly so it's a bit screwed
up in some places but we can clearly make
out this black square here in the middle of
this silicon die as well as all of the connections
that go to it although only two of them are
actually connected to the outside world so
let's take a closer look at that so here's
another composite microscope picture of that
this time with the entire can cut off and
we can make out much more clearly that black
area with all of the connections although
here I've actually damaged it a bit and that
was just by blowing on it with some air to
clean it off and that's because if we look
closely we can see that this black thing is
actually suspended on all of these connections
this thing is actually floating in the middle
of it which as you can guess means the thermal
mass of it is much much lower than the previous
piece of ceramic that was 0.1 mm thick I don't
know how thin this is but I imagine it's a
lot thinner and taking an even closer look
now we can see all these individual wires
going from the piece of silicon to this sensor
region they're all individually separate you
might think that these are just for mechanical
support to suspend it in the middle however
they're actually essential to how this thing
works as a thermopile.
To explain how this works I have this here
graphic from Shanghai Sunshine Technologies
and we can see that this thing is just made
up of a whole bunch of thermoelectric elements
just like a K-type thermocouple that has two
dissimilar metals this uses two dissimilar
metal connections between the floating black
area in the middle that's heated up by the
thermal radiation from whatever you're pointing
it at and the actual silicon surround which
has a known temperature for cold junction
compensation which is derived from that thermistor
on the metal body that we saw before and of
course the reason why there's more than just
one junction is to get better sensitivity
and of course this black area here although
it just looks black it's presumably some sort
of very specialized material that's very absorbent
to IR wavelengths as well and that would increase
the sensitivity as well it also looks as if
it has a sort of wavy texture to it it's not
completely flat I would assume that this has
something to do with reducing reflections
inside the device as that may influence the
readings if certain angles were to cause reflections
and increase the reading we can also see these
etching windows in the diagram these are a
undesirable thing these are more just to facilitate
the manufacture of the device these actually
result in the absorber area not being able
to conduct heat through the substrate to the
hot junctions of the thermocouples so the
shape and design of these is quite important
for sensitivity as well also just because
we can't see them in the other one doesn't
mean they're not there the black absorber
material on top of the substrate presumably
is filling those gaps in however in order
to see that I'd probably need some sort of
like scanning electron microscope and yeah
I don't think I'm going to buy one of them
anytime soon now just to show you how thin
this thing is here I have a pair of tweezers
and just gently pushing on it we can see that
it just completely disintegrates this thing
is extremely thin just blowing on it too hard
will cause damage to it and taking the piece
of silicon out now and putting it on the end
of some tweezers we can really see just how
small this thing is and turning it around
we can actually see the back side of it has
been machined out or I guess etched I'm not
really familiar with the exact principles
of how the sort of mems device would be manufactured
but I can certainly appreciate just how cool
it is that we can manufacture stuff like this
not only once off but on such a scale but
the average consumer can buy one of these
for very little money especially when a couple
decades ago this sort of technology would
be considered black magic as something like
this would be obscenely expensive to manufacture.
And that's it for this video thank you for
watching hope you enjoyed it and I'll just
leave you now with some pictures I took throughout
this project.     :)